The danger , however , was at present so unperceived , that they did not by any means rank as misfortunes with her .
Sorrow came -- a gentle sorrow -- but not at all in the shape of any disagreeable consciousness .-- Miss Taylor married .
It was on the wedding - day of this beloved friend that Emma first sat in mournful thought of any continuance .
Her father composed himself to sleep after dinner , as usual , and she had then only to sit and think of what she had lost .
" How often we shall be going to see them , and they coming to see us !-- We shall be always meeting !
And as for James , you may be very sure he will always like going to Randalls , because of his daughter ' s being housemaid there .
He had returned to a late dinner , after some days ' absence , and now walked up to Hartfield to say that all were well in Brunswick Square .
It is a beautiful moonlight night ; and so mild that I must draw back from your great fire ."
" Poor Mr . and Miss Woodhouse , if you please ; but I cannot possibly say ` poor Miss Taylor .'
" That is what you have in your head , I know -- and what you would certainly say if my father were not by ."
" I believe it is very true , my dear , indeed ," said Mr . Woodhouse , with a sigh .
Mr . Knightley loves to find fault with me , you know -- in a joke -- it is all a joke .
" Emma knows I never flatter her ," said Mr . Knightley , " but I meant no reflection on any body .
Every body was punctual , every body in their best looks : not a tear , and hardly a long face to be seen .
Oh no ; we all felt that we were going to be only half a mile apart , and were sure of meeting every day ."
" And you have forgotten one matter of joy to me ," said Emma , " and a very considerable one -- that I made the match myself .
my dear , I wish you would not make matches and foretell things , for whatever you say always comes to pass .
" I promise you to make none for myself , papa ; but I must , indeed , for other people .
And after such success , you know !-- Every body said that Mr . Weston would never marry again .
Some people even talked of a promise to his wife on her deathbed , and others of the son and the uncle not letting him .
Your time has been properly and delicately spent , if you have been endeavouring for the last four years to bring about this marriage .
And as to my poor word ` success ,' which you quarrel with , I do not know that I am so entirely without any claim to it .
You have drawn two pretty pictures ; but I think there may be a third -- a something between the do - nothing and the do - all .
" Emma never thinks of herself , if she can do good to others ," rejoined Mr . Woodhouse , understanding but in part .
" But , my dear , pray do not make any more matches ; they are silly things , and break up one ' s family circle grievously ."
I think very well of Mr . Elton , and this is the only way I have of doing him a service ."
But if you want to shew him any attention , my dear , ask him to come and dine with us some day .
Invite him to dinner , Emma , and help him to the best of the fish and the chicken , but leave him to chuse his own wife .
Depend upon it , a man of six or seven - and - twenty can take care of himself ."
He quitted the militia and engaged in trade , having brothers already established in a good way in London , which afforded him a favourable opening .
He was looked on as sufficiently belonging to the place to make his merits and prospects a kind of common concern .
Now , upon his father ' s marriage , it was very generally proposed , as a most proper attention , that the visit should take place .
For a few days , every morning visit in Highbury included some mention of the handsome letter Mrs . Weston had received .
" I suppose you have heard of the handsome letter Mr . Frank Churchill has written to Mrs . Weston ?
Mr . Woodhouse saw the letter , and he says he never saw such a handsome letter in his life ."
But never did she go without Mr . Woodhouse ' s giving a gentle sigh , and saying , " Ah , poor Miss Taylor !
There was no recovering Miss Taylor -- nor much likelihood of ceasing to pity her ; but a few weeks brought some alleviation to Mr . Woodhouse .
His own stomach could bear nothing rich , and he could never believe other people to be different from himself .
Mrs . Bates , the widow of a former vicar of Highbury , was a very old lady , almost past every thing but tea and quadrille .
Her daughter enjoyed a most uncommon degree of popularity for a woman neither young , handsome , rich , nor married .
And yet she was a happy woman , and a woman whom no one named without good - will .
The simplicity and cheerfulness of her nature , her contented and grateful spirit , were a recommendation to every body , and a mine of felicity to herself .
She was a great talker upon little matters , which exactly suited Mr . Woodhouse , full of trivial communications and harmless gossip .
A very gracious invitation was returned , and the evening no longer dreaded by the fair mistress of the mansion .
She was a very pretty girl , and her beauty happened to be of a sort which Emma particularly admired .
Those soft blue eyes , and all those natural graces , should not be wasted on the inferior society of Highbury and its connexions .
The friends from whom she had just parted , though very good sort of people , must be doing her harm .
It would be an interesting , and certainly a very kind undertaking ; highly becoming her own situation in life , her leisure , and powers .
But in every respect , as she saw more of her , she approved her , and was confirmed in all her kind designs .
Altogether she was quite convinced of Harriet Smith ' s being exactly the young friend she wanted -- exactly the something which her home required .
Her first attempts at usefulness were in an endeavour to find out who were the parents , but Harriet could not tell .
Emma was obliged to fancy what she liked -- but she could never believe that in the same situation _she_ should not have discovered the truth .
She had been satisfied to hear and believe just what Mrs . Goddard chose to tell her ; and looked no farther .
For some time she was amused , without thinking beyond the immediate cause ; but as she came to understand the family better , other feelings arose .
He had a very fine flock , and , while she was with them , he had been bid more for his wool than any body in the country .
" Mr . Martin , I suppose , is not a man of information beyond the line of his own business ?
He reads the Agricultural Reports , and some other books that lay in one of the window seats -- but he reads all _them_ to himself .
But sometimes of an evening , before we went to cards , he would read something aloud out of the Elegant Extracts , very entertaining .
He had never heard of such books before I mentioned them , but he is determined to get them now as soon as ever he can ."
He is in Highbury every now and then , and he is sure to ride through every week in his way to Kingston .
" That may be , and I may have seen him fifty times , but without having any idea of his name .
A young farmer , whether on horseback or on foot , is the very last sort of person to raise my curiosity .
A degree or two lower , and a creditable appearance might interest me ; I might hope to be useful to their families in some way or other .
It is not likely you should ever have observed him ; but he knows you very well indeed -- I mean by sight ."
They seem very comfortable as they are , and if she were to take any pains to marry him , she would probably repent it .
" Well , and that is as early as most men can afford to marry , who are not born to an independence .
Mr . Martin , I imagine , has his fortune entirely to make -- cannot be at all beforehand with the world .
They have no indoors man , else they do not want for any thing ; and Mrs . Martin talks of taking a boy another year ."
But while I visit at Hartfield , and you are so kind to me , Miss Woodhouse , I am not afraid of what any body can do ."
Not that I think Mr . Martin would ever marry any body but what had had some education -- and been very well brought up .
But if he marries a very ignorant , vulgar woman , certainly I had better not visit her , if I can help it ."
He was on foot , and after looking very respectfully at her , looked with most unfeigned satisfaction at her companion .
Harriet was not insensible of manner ; she had voluntarily noticed her father ' s gentleness with admiration as well as wonder .
He was so busy the last time he was at Kingston that he quite forgot it , but he goes again to - morrow .
" He is very plain , undoubtedly -- remarkably plain :-- but that is nothing compared with his entire want of gentility .
" To be sure ," said Harriet , in a mortified voice , " he is not so genteel as real gentlemen ."
" Mr . Knightley ' s air is so remarkably good that it is not fair to compare Mr . Martin with _him_ .
Mr . Martin is now awkward and abrupt ; what will he be at Mr . Weston ' s time of life ?"
He will be a completely gross , vulgar farmer , totally inattentive to appearances , and thinking of nothing but profit and loss ."
" How much his business engrosses him already is very plain from the circumstance of his forgetting to inquire for the book you recommended .
He was a great deal too full of the market to think of any thing else -- which is just as it should be , for a thriving man .
And I have no doubt that he _will_ thrive , and be a very rich man in time -- and his being illiterate and coarse need not disturb _us_ ."
" In one respect , perhaps , Mr . Elton ' s manners are superior to Mr . Knightley ' s or Mr . Weston ' s .
On the contrary , I think a young man might be very safely recommended to take Mr . Elton as a model .
Mr . Elton was the very person fixed on by Emma for driving the young farmer out of Harriet ' s head .
She thought it would be an excellent match ; and only too palpably desirable , natural , and probable , for her to have much merit in planning it .
And he was really a very pleasing young man , a young man whom any woman not fastidious might like .
Emma must do Harriet good : and by supplying her with a new object of interest , Harriet may be said to do Emma good .
" Perhaps you think I am come on purpose to quarrel with you , knowing Weston to be out , and that you must still fight your own battle ."
" Mr . Weston would undoubtedly support me , if he were here , for he thinks exactly as I do on the subject .
But on the other hand , as Emma wants to see her better informed , it will be an inducement to her to read more herself .
She will never submit to any thing requiring industry and patience , and a subjection of the fancy to the understanding .
" But I ," he soon added , " who have had no such charm thrown over my senses , must still see , hear , and remember .
At ten years old , she had the misfortune of being able to answer questions which puzzled her sister at seventeen .
" You are better placed _here_ ; very fit for a wife , but not at all for a governess .
How can Emma imagine she has any thing to learn herself , while Harriet is presenting such a delightful inferiority ?
She will grow just refined enough to be uncomfortable with those among whom birth and circumstances have placed her home .
" I do not know what I could imagine , but I confess that I have seldom seen a face or figure more pleasing to me than hers .
what a bloom of full health , and such a pretty height and size ; such a firm and upright figure !
There is health , not merely in her bloom , but in her air , her head , her glance .

