Emma Woodhouse , handsome , clever , and rich , with a comfortable home and happy disposition , seemed to unite some of the best blessings of existence ; and had lived nearly twenty - one years in the world with very little to distress or vex her .
The real evils , indeed , of Emma ' s situation were the power of having rather too much her own way , and a disposition to think a little too well of herself ; these were the disadvantages which threatened alloy to her many enjoyments .
A large debt of gratitude was owing here ; but the intercourse of the last seven years , the equal footing and perfect unreserve which had soon followed Isabella ' s marriage , on their being left to each other , was yet a dearer , tenderer recollection .
Mr . Weston is such a good - humoured , pleasant , excellent man , that he thoroughly deserves a good wife ;-- and you would not have had Miss Taylor live with us for ever , and bear all my odd humours , when she might have a house of her own ?"
It was very lucky , for I would not have had poor James think himself slighted upon any account ; and I am sure she will make a very good servant : she is a civil , pretty - spoken girl ; I have a great opinion of her .
Whenever I see her , she always curtseys and asks me how I do , in a very pretty manner ; and when you have had her here to do needlework , I observe she always turns the lock of the door the right way and never bangs it .
Mr . Knightley , a sensible man about seven or eight - and - thirty , was not only a very old and intimate friend of the family , but particularly connected with it , as the elder brother of Isabella ' s husband .
I made the match , you know , four years ago ; and to have it take place , and be proved in the right , when so many people said Mr . Weston would never marry again , may comfort me for any thing ."
The aunt was a capricious woman , and governed her husband entirely ; but it was not in Mr . Weston ' s nature to imagine that any caprice could be strong enough to affect one so dear , and , as he believed , so deservedly dear .
Mrs . Weston had , of course , formed a very favourable idea of the young man ; and such a pleasing attention was an irresistible proof of his great good sense , and a most welcome addition to every source and every expression of congratulation which her marriage had already secured .
She felt herself a most fortunate woman ; and she had lived long enough to know how fortunate she might well be thought , where the only regret was for a partial separation from friends whose friendship for her had never cooled , and who could ill bear to part with her .
And then there was such comfort in the very easy distance of Randalls from Hartfield , so convenient for even solitary female walking , and in Mr . Weston ' s disposition and circumstances , which would make the approaching season no hindrance to their spending half the evenings in the week together .
What was unwholesome to him he regarded as unfit for any body ; and he had , therefore , earnestly tried to dissuade them from having any wedding - cake at all , and when that proved vain , as earnestly tried to prevent any body ' s eating it .
With such an opinion , in confirmation of his own , Mr . Woodhouse hoped to influence every visitor of the newly married pair ; but still the cake was eaten ; and there was no rest for his benevolent nerves till it was all gone .
She loved every body , was interested in every body ' s happiness , quicksighted to every body ' s merits ; thought herself a most fortunate creature , and surrounded with blessings in such an excellent mother , and so many good neighbours and friends , and a home that wanted for nothing .
These were the ladies whom Emma found herself very frequently able to collect ; and happy was she , for her father ' s sake , in the power ; though , as far as she was herself concerned , it was no remedy for the absence of Mrs . Weston .
She was delighted to see her father look comfortable , and very much pleased with herself for contriving things so well ; but the quiet prosings of three such women made her feel that every evening so spent was indeed one of the long evenings she had fearfully anticipated .
Her father never went beyond the shrubbery , where two divisions of the ground sufficed him for his long walk , or his short , as the year varied ; and since Mrs . Weston ' s marriage her exercise had been too much confined .
Mrs . Goddard , and the teachers , and the girls and the affairs of the school in general , formed naturally a great part of the conversation -- and but for her acquaintance with the Martins of Abbey - Mill Farm , it must have been the whole .
Mrs . Martin had told her one day ( and there was a blush as she said it ,) that it was impossible for any body to be a better son , and therefore she was sure , whenever he married , he would make a good husband .
There can be no doubt of your being a gentleman ' s daughter , and you must support your claim to that station by every thing within your own power , or there will be plenty of people who would take pleasure in degrading you ."
His appearance was very neat , and he looked like a sensible young man , but his person had no other advantage ; and when he came to be contrasted with gentlemen , she thought he must lose all the ground he had gained in Harriet ' s inclination .
They remained but a few minutes together , as Miss Woodhouse must not be kept waiting ; and Harriet then came running to her with a smiling face , and in a flutter of spirits , which Miss Woodhouse hoped very soon to compose .
I should be surprized if , after seeing them , you could be in company with Mr . Martin again without perceiving him to be a very inferior creature -- and rather wondering at yourself for having ever thought him at all agreeable before .
You are so much used to live alone , that you do not know the value of a companion ; and , perhaps no man can be a good judge of the comfort a woman feels in the society of one of her own sex , after being used to it all her life .
I have seen a great many lists of her drawing - up at various times of books that she meant to read regularly through -- and very good lists they were -- very well chosen , and very neatly arranged -- sometimes alphabetically , and sometimes by some other rule .
" I should have been sorry , Mr . Knightley , to be dependent on _your_ recommendation , had I quitted Mr . Woodhouse ' s family and wanted another situation ; I do not think you would have spoken a good word for me to any body .
Pray excuse me ; but supposing any little inconvenience may be apprehended from the intimacy , it cannot be expected that Emma , accountable to nobody but her father , who perfectly approves the acquaintance , should put an end to it , so long as it is a source of pleasure to herself .
There were wishes at Randalls respecting Emma ' s destiny , but it was not desirable to have them suspected ; and the quiet transition which Mr . Knightley soon afterwards made to " What does Weston think of the weather ; shall we have rain ?"
She played and sang ;-- and drew in almost every style ; but steadiness had always been wanting ; and in nothing had she approached the degree of excellence which she would have been glad to command , and ought not to have failed of .
There was merit in every drawing -- in the least finished , perhaps the most ; her style was spirited ; but had there been much less , or had there been ten times more , the delight and admiration of her two companions would have been the same .
Then , here come all my attempts at three of those four children ;-- there they are , Henry and John and Bella , from one end of the sheet to the other , and any one of them might do for any one of the rest .
" Miss Woodhouse has given her friend the only beauty she wanted ,"-- observed Mrs . Weston to him -- not in the least suspecting that she was addressing a lover .--" The expression of the eye is most correct , but Miss Smith has not those eyebrows and eyelashes .
" You , sir , may say any thing ," cried Mr . Elton , " but I must confess that I regard it as a most happy thought , the placing of Miss Smith out of doors ; and the tree is touched with such inimitable spirit !
" He was too good !-- she could not endure the thought !-- she would not give him such a troublesome office for the world ,"-- brought on the desired repetition of entreaties and assurances ,-- and a very few minutes settled the business .
Mr . Elton was to take the drawing to London , chuse the frame , and give the directions ; and Emma thought she could so pack it as to ensure its safety without much incommoding him , while he seemed mostly fearful of not being incommoded enough .
He is an excellent young man , and will suit Harriet exactly ; it will be an ` Exactly so ,' as he says himself ; but he does sigh and languish , and study for compliments rather more than I could endure as a principal .
And he wrote as if he really loved her very much -- but she did not know -- and so , she was come as fast as she could to ask Miss Woodhouse what she should do .--" Emma was half - ashamed of her friend for seeming so pleased and so doubtful .
There were not merely no grammatical errors , but as a composition it would not have disgraced a gentleman ; the language , though plain , was strong and unaffected , and the sentiments it conveyed very much to the credit of the writer .
" Miss Woodhouse , as you will not give me your opinion , I must do as well as I can by myself ; and I have now quite determined , and really almost made up my mind -- to refuse Mr . Martin .
Emma felt the bad taste of her friend , but let it pass with a " very true ; and it would be a small consolation to her , for the clownish manner which might be offending her every hour of the day , to know that her husband could write a good letter ."
Emma assured her there would be no difficulty in the answer , and advised its being written directly , which was agreed to , in the hope of her assistance ; and though Emma continued to protest against any assistance being wanted , it was in fact given in the formation of every sentence .
" At this moment , perhaps , Mr . Elton is shewing your picture to his mother and sisters , telling how much more beautiful is the original , and after being asked for it five or six times , allowing them to hear your name , your own dear name ."
For some weeks past she had been spending more than half her time there , and gradually getting to have a bed - room appropriated to herself ; and Emma judged it best in every respect , safest and kindest , to keep her with them as much as possible just at present .
" Well , I believe , if you will excuse me , Mr . Knightley , if you will not consider me as doing a very rude thing , I shall take Emma ' s advice and go out for a quarter of an hour .
" I would ask for the pleasure of your company , Mr . Knightley , but I am a very slow walker , and my pace would be tedious to you ; and , besides , you have another long walk before you , to Donwell Abbey ."
But I could not reason so to a man in love , and was willing to trust to there being no harm in her , to her having that sort of disposition , which , in good hands , like his , might be easily led aright and turn out very well .
They would be estimated very differently by others as well as myself ; Mr . Martin may be the richest of the two , but he is undoubtedly her inferior as to rank in society .-- The sphere in which she moves is much above his .-- It would be a degradation ."
" Whoever might be her parents ," said Mr . Knightley , " whoever may have had the charge of her , it does not appear to have been any part of their plan to introduce her into what you would call good society .
After receiving a very indifferent education she is left in Mrs . Goddard ' s hands to shift as she can ;-- to move , in short , in Mrs . Goddard ' s line , to have Mrs . Goddard ' s acquaintance .
Her good - nature , too , is not so very slight a claim , comprehending , as it does , real , thorough sweetness of temper and manner , a very humble opinion of herself , and a great readiness to be pleased with other people .
Men of family would not be very fond of connecting themselves with a girl of such obscurity -- and most prudent men would be afraid of the inconvenience and disgrace they might be involved in , when the mystery of her parentage came to be revealed .
She must abide by the evil of having refused him , whatever it may be ; and as to the refusal itself , I will not pretend to say that I might not influence her a little ; but I assure you there was very little for me or for any body to do .
He was the brother of her friends , and he took pains to please her ; and altogether , having seen nobody better ( that must have been his great assistant ) she might not , while she was at Abbey - Mill , find him disagreeable .
He knows that he is a very handsome young man , and a great favourite wherever he goes ; and from his general way of talking in unreserved moments , when there are only men present , I am convinced that he does not mean to throw himself away .
He felt the disappointment of the young man , and was mortified to have been the means of promoting it , by the sanction he had given ; and the part which he was persuaded Emma had taken in the affair , was provoking him exceedingly .
Mr . Perry could not quite understand him , but he was very sure there must be a _lady_ in the case , and he told him so ; and Mr . Elton only looked very conscious and smiling , and rode off in great spirits .
Miss Nash , head - teacher at Mrs . Goddard ' s , had written out at least three hundred ; and Harriet , who had taken the first hint of it from her , hoped , with Miss Woodhouse ' s help , to get a great many more .
It will give you every thing that you want -- consideration , independence , a proper home -- it will fix you in the centre of all your real friends , close to Hartfield and to me , and confirm our intimacy for ever .
-- and " Dear Miss Woodhouse ," was all that Harriet , with many tender embraces could articulate at first ; but when they did arrive at something more like conversation , it was sufficiently clear to her friend that she saw , felt , anticipated , and remembered just as she ought .
He will be here this evening , I dare say , and then I will give it him back , and some nonsense or other will pass between us , and you shall not be committed .-- Your soft eyes shall chuse their own time for beaming .
" My dear Harriet , you must not refine too much upon this charade .-- You will betray your feelings improperly , if you are too conscious and too quick , and appear to affix more meaning , or even quite all the meaning which may be affixed to it .
Mr . John Knightley must be in town again on the 28th , and we ought to be thankful , papa , that we are to have the whole of the time they can give to the country , that two or three days are not to be taken out for the Abbey .
Unwelcome as it was , Mr . Woodhouse could only give a submissive sigh ; and as Emma saw his spirits affected by the idea of his daughter ' s attachment to her husband , she immediately led to such a branch of the subject as must raise them .
Harriet turned away ; but Emma could receive him with the usual smile , and her quick eye soon discerned in his the consciousness of having made a push -- of having thrown a die ; and she imagined he was come to see how it might turn up .
Though now the middle of December , there had yet been no weather to prevent the young ladies from tolerably regular exercise ; and on the morrow , Emma had a charitable visit to pay to a poor sick family , who lived a little way out of Highbury .
Their road to this detached cottage was down Vicarage Lane , a lane leading at right angles from the broad , though irregular , main street of the place ; and , as may be inferred , containing the blessed abode of Mr . Elton .
A few inferior dwellings were first to be passed , and then , about a quarter of a mile down the lane rose the Vicarage , an old and not very good house , almost as close to the road as it could be .
It had no advantage of situation ; but had been very much smartened up by the present proprietor ; and , such as it was , there could be no possibility of the two friends passing it without a slackened pace and observing eyes .-- Emma ' s remark was --
" I do not often walk this way _now_ ," said Emma , as they proceeded , " but _then_ there will be an inducement , and I shall gradually get intimately acquainted with all the hedges , gates , pools and pollards of this part of Highbury ."
" I must see somebody very superior to any one I have seen yet , to be tempted ; Mr . Elton , you know , ( recollecting herself ,) is out of the question : and I do _not_ wish to see any such person .
This does not apply , however , to Miss Bates ; she is only too good natured and too silly to suit me ; but , in general , she is very much to the taste of every body , though single and though poor .
Poverty certainly has not contracted her mind : I really believe , if she had only a shilling in the world , she would be very likely to give away sixpence of it ; and nobody is afraid of her : that is a great charm ."
" If I know myself , Harriet , mine is an active , busy mind , with a great many independent resources ; and I do not perceive why I should be more in want of employment at forty or fifty than one - and - twenty .
Every letter from her is read forty times over ; her compliments to all friends go round and round again ; and if she does but send her aunt the pattern of a stomacher , or knit a pair of garters for her grandmother , one hears of nothing else for a month .
She understood their ways , could allow for their ignorance and their temptations , had no romantic expectations of extraordinary virtue from those for whom education had done so little ; entered into their troubles with ready sympathy , and always gave her assistance with as much intelligence as good - will .
In the present instance , it was sickness and poverty together which she came to visit ; and after remaining there as long as she could give comfort or advice , she quitted the cottage with such an impression of the scene as made her say to Harriet , as they walked away ,
How trifling they make every thing else appear !-- I feel now as if I could think of nothing but these poor creatures all the rest of the day ; and yet , who can say how soon it may all vanish from my mind ?"
" And really , I do not think the impression will soon be over ," said Emma , as she crossed the low hedge , and tottering footstep which ended the narrow , slippery path through the cottage garden , and brought them into the lane again .
This would not do ; she immediately stopped , under pretence of having some alteration to make in the lacing of her half - boot , and stooping down in complete occupation of the footpath , begged them to have the goodness to walk on , and she would follow in half a minute .
Mr . Elton was speaking with animation , Harriet listening with a very pleased attention ; and Emma , having sent the child on , was beginning to think how she might draw back a little more , when they both looked around , and she was obliged to join them .
They now walked on together quietly , till within view of the vicarage pales , when a sudden resolution , of at least getting Harriet into the house , made her again find something very much amiss about her boot , and fall behind to arrange it once more .
She then broke the lace off short , and dexterously throwing it into a ditch , was presently obliged to entreat them to stop , and acknowledged her inability to put herself to rights so as to be able to walk home in tolerable comfort .
The room they were taken into was the one he chiefly occupied , and looking forwards ; behind it was another with which it immediately communicated ; the door between them was open , and Emma passed into it with the housekeeper to receive her assistance in the most comfortable manner .
Still , however , though every thing had not been accomplished by her ingenious device , she could not but flatter herself that it had been the occasion of much present enjoyment to both , and must be leading them forward to the great event .
Mr . John Knightley was a tall , gentleman - like , and very clever man ; rising in his profession , domestic , and respectable in his private character ; but with reserved manners which prevented his being generally pleasing ; and capable of being sometimes out of humour .
He was not an ill - tempered man , not so often unreasonably cross as to deserve such a reproach ; but his temper was not his great perfection ; and , indeed , with such a worshipping wife , it was hardly possible that any natural defects in it should not be increased .
And dear Emma , too !-- What a dreadful loss to you both !-- I have been so grieved for you .-- I could not imagine how you could possibly do without her .-- It is a sad change indeed .-- But I hope she is pretty well , sir ."
Either in the morning or evening of every day , excepting one , have we seen either Mr . Weston or Mrs . Weston , and generally both , either at Randalls or here -- and as you may suppose , Isabella , most frequently here .
Every body must be aware that Miss Taylor must be missed , but every body ought also to be assured that Mr . and Mrs . Weston do really prevent our missing her by any means to the extent we ourselves anticipated -- which is the exact truth ."
" Why , to be sure ," said Mr . Woodhouse --" yes , certainly -- I cannot deny that Mrs . Weston , poor Mrs . Weston , does come and see us pretty often -- but then -- she is always obliged to go away again ."
Emma ' s sense of right however had decided it ; and besides the consideration of what was due to each brother , she had particular pleasure , from the circumstance of the late disagreement between Mr . Knightley and herself , in procuring him the proper invitation .
It did assist ; for though he began with grave looks and short questions , he was soon led on to talk of them all in the usual way , and to take the child out of her arms with all the unceremoniousness of perfect amity .
" If you were as much guided by nature in your estimate of men and women , and as little under the power of fancy and whim in your dealings with them , as you are where these children are concerned , we might always think alike ."
" A material difference then ," she replied --" and no doubt you were much my superior in judgment at that period of our lives ; but does not the lapse of one - and - twenty years bring our understandings a good deal nearer ?"
" My poor dear Isabella ," said he , fondly taking her hand , and interrupting , for a few moments , her busy labours for some one of her five children --" How long it is , how terribly long since you were here !
my dear , but Perry had many doubts about the sea doing her any good ; and as to myself , I have been long perfectly convinced , though perhaps I never told you so before , that the sea is very rarely of use to any body .
Good old Mrs . Bates -- I will call upon her to - morrow , and take my children .-- They are always so pleased to see my children .-- And that excellent Miss Bates !-- such thorough worthy people !-- How are they , sir ?"
Why does he make it any business of his , to wonder at what I do ?-- at my taking my family to one part of the coast or another ?-- I may be allowed , I hope , the use of my judgment as well as Mr .
That ' s a consideration indeed .-- But John , as to what I was telling you of my idea of moving the path to Langham , of turning it more to the right that it may not cut through the home meadows , I cannot conceive any difficulty .

