Even before Miss Taylor had ceased to hold the nominal office of governess , the mildness of her temper had hardly allowed her to impose any restraint ; and the shadow of authority being now long passed away , they had been living together as friend and friend very mutually attached , and Emma doing just what she liked ; highly esteeming Miss Taylor ' s judgment , but directed chiefly by her own .
She had been a friend and companion such as few possessed : intelligent , well - informed , useful , gentle , knowing all the ways of the family , interested in all its concerns , and peculiarly interested in herself , in every pleasure , every scheme of hers -- one to whom she could speak every thought as it arose , and who had such an affection for her as could never find fault .
How was she to bear the change ?-- It was true that her friend was going only half a mile from them ; but Emma was aware that great must be the difference between a Mrs . Weston , only half a mile from them , and a Miss Taylor in the house ; and with all her advantages , natural and domestic , she was now in great danger of suffering from intellectual solitude .
Her sister , though comparatively but little removed by matrimony , being settled in London , only sixteen miles off , was much beyond her daily reach ; and many a long October and November evening must be struggled through at Hartfield , before Christmas brought the next visit from Isabella and her husband , and their little children , to fill the house , and give her pleasant society again .
Mr . Knightley , in fact , was one of the few people who could see faults in Emma Woodhouse , and the only one who ever told her of them : and though this was not particularly agreeable to Emma herself , she knew it would be so much less so to her father , that she would not have him really suspect such a circumstance as her not being thought perfect by every body .
But if , which I rather imagine , your making the match , as you call it , means only your planning it , your saying to yourself one idle day , ` I think it would be a very good thing for Miss Taylor if Mr . Weston were to marry her ,' and saying it again to yourself every now and then afterwards , why do you talk of success ?
There is nobody in Highbury who deserves him -- and he has been here a whole year , and has fitted up his house so comfortably , that it would be a shame to have him single any longer -- and I thought when he was joining their hands to - day , he looked so very much as if he would like to have the same kind office done for him !
The boy had , with the additional softening claim of a lingering illness of his mother ' s , been the means of a sort of reconciliation ; and Mr . and Mrs . Churchill , having no children of their own , nor any other young creature of equal kindred to care for , offered to take the whole charge of the little Frank soon after her decease .
It was now some time since Miss Taylor had begun to influence his schemes ; but as it was not the tyrannic influence of youth on youth , it had not shaken his determination of never settling till he could purchase Randalls , and the sale of Randalls was long looked forward to ; but he had gone steadily on , with these objects in view , till they were accomplished .
He had never been an unhappy man ; his own temper had secured him from that , even in his first marriage ; but his second must shew him how delightful a well - judging and truly amiable woman could be , and must give him the pleasantest proof of its being a great deal better to choose than to be chosen , to excite gratitude than to feel it .
Real , long - standing regard brought the Westons and Mr . Knightley ; and by Mr . Elton , a young man living alone without liking it , the privilege of exchanging any vacant evening of his own blank solitude for the elegancies and society of Mr . Woodhouse ' s drawing - room , and the smiles of his lovely daughter , was in no danger of being thrown away .
She was a plain , motherly kind of woman , who had worked hard in her youth , and now thought herself entitled to the occasional holiday of a tea - visit ; and having formerly owed much to Mr . Woodhouse ' s kindness , felt his particular claim on her to leave her neat parlour , hung round with fancy - work , whenever she could , and win or lose a few sixpences by his fireside .
As she sat one morning , looking forward to exactly such a close of the present day , a note was brought from Mrs . Goddard , requesting , in most respectful terms , to be allowed to bring Miss Smith with her ; a most welcome request : for Miss Smith was a girl of seventeen , whom Emma knew very well by sight , and had long felt an interest in , on account of her beauty .
She must allow him to be still frequently coming to look ; any thing less would certainly have been too little in a lover ; and he was ready at the smallest intermission of the pencil , to jump up and see the progress , and be charmed .-- There was no being displeased with such an encourager , for his admiration made him discern a likeness almost before it was possible .
It must be done directly ; it must be done in London ; the order must go through the hands of some intelligent person whose taste could be depended on ; and Isabella , the usual doer of all commissions , must not be applied to , because it was December , and Mr . Woodhouse could not bear the idea of her stirring out of her house in the fogs of December .
While she was gone , Mr . Knightley called , and sat some time with Mr . Woodhouse and Emma , till Mr . Woodhouse , who had previously made up his mind to walk out , was persuaded by his daughter not to defer it , and was induced by the entreaties of both , though against the scruples of his own civility , to leave Mr . Knightley for that purpose .
Now , as we may fairly suppose , he would not allow much time to pass before he spoke to the lady , and as he does not appear to have spoken yesterday , it is not unlikely that he should be at Mrs . Goddard ' s to - day ; and she may be detained by a visitor , without thinking him at all a tiresome wretch ."
She did not repent what she had done ; she still thought herself a better judge of such a point of female right and refinement than he could be ; but yet she had a sort of habitual respect for his judgment in general , which made her dislike having it so loudly against her ; and to have him sitting just opposite to her in angry state , was very disagreeable .
He certainly might have heard Mr . Elton speak with more unreserve than she had ever done , and Mr . Elton might not be of an imprudent , inconsiderate disposition as to money matters ; he might naturally be rather attentive than otherwise to them ; but then , Mr . Knightley did not make due allowance for the influence of a strong passion at war with all interested motives .
She cast her eye over it , pondered , caught the meaning , read it through again to be quite certain , and quite mistress of the lines , and then passing it to Harriet , sat happily smiling , and saying to herself , while Harriet was puzzling over the paper in all the confusion of hope and dulness , " Very well , Mr . Elton , very well indeed .
" It is one thing ," said she , presently -- her cheeks in a glow --" to have very good sense in a common way , like every body else , and if there is any thing to say , to sit down and write a letter , and say just what you must , in a short way ; and another , to write verses and charades like this ."
Fortune I do not want ; employment I do not want ; consequence I do not want : I believe few married women are half as much mistress of their husband ' s house as I am of Hartfield ; and never , never could I expect to be so truly beloved and important ; so always first and always right in any man ' s eyes as I am in my father ' s ."
Mr . Elton was still talking , still engaged in some interesting detail ; and Emma experienced some disappointment when she found that he was only giving his fair companion an account of the yesterday ' s party at his friend Cole ' s , and that she was come in herself for the Stilton cheese , the north Wiltshire , the butter , the cellery , the beet - root , and all the dessert .
The coming of her sister ' s family was so very near at hand , that first in anticipation , and then in reality , it became henceforth her prime object of interest ; and during the ten days of their stay at Hartfield it was not to be expected -- she did not herself expect -- that any thing beyond occasional , fortuitous assistance could be afforded by her to the lovers .
She was not a woman of strong understanding or any quickness ; and with this resemblance of her father , she inherited also much of his constitution ; was delicate in her own health , over - careful of that of her children , had many fears and many nerves , and was as fond of her own Mr . Wingfield in town as her father could be of Mr . Perry .
Perhaps she might have passed over more had his manners been flattering to Isabella ' s sister , but they were only those of a calmly kind brother and friend , without praise and without blindness ; but hardly any degree of personal compliment could have made her regardless of that greatest fault of all in her eyes which he sometimes fell into , the want of respectful forbearance towards her father .
The evening was quiet and conversable , as Mr . Woodhouse declined cards entirely for the sake of comfortable talk with his dear Isabella , and the little party made two natural divisions ; on one side he and his daughter ; on the other the two Mr . Knightleys ; their subjects totally distinct , or very rarely mixing -- and Emma only occasionally joining in one or the other .
The plan of a drain , the change of a fence , the felling of a tree , and the destination of every acre for wheat , turnips , or spring corn , was entered into with as much equality of interest by John , as his cooler manners rendered possible ; and if his willing brother ever left him any thing to inquire about , his inquiries even approached a tone of eagerness .
" I am sorry to hear you say so , sir ; but I assure you , excepting those little nervous head - aches and palpitations which I am never entirely free from anywhere , I am quite well myself ; and if the children were rather pale before they went to bed , it was only because they were a little more tired than usual , from their journey and the happiness of coming .
Mr . Woodhouse was rather agitated by such harsh reflections on his friend Perry , to whom he had , in fact , though unconsciously , been attributing many of his own feelings and expressions ;-- but the soothing attentions of his daughters gradually removed the present evil , and the immediate alertness of one brother , and better recollections of the other , prevented any renewal of it .
How they were all to be conveyed , he would have made a difficulty if he could , but as his son and daughter ' s carriage and horses were actually at Hartfield , he was not able to make more than a simple question on that head ; it hardly amounted to a doubt ; nor did it occupy Emma long to convince him that they might in one of the carriages find room for Harriet also .
The evening before this great event ( for it was a very great event that Mr . Woodhouse should dine out , on the 24th of December ) had been spent by Harriet at Hartfield , and she had gone home so much indisposed with a cold , that , but for her own earnest wish of being nursed by Mrs . Goddard , Emma could not have allowed her to leave the house .
Emma sat with her as long as she could , to attend her in Mrs . Goddard ' s unavoidable absences , and raise her spirits by representing how much Mr . Elton ' s would be depressed when he knew her state ; and left her at last tolerably comfortable , in the sweet dependence of his having a most comfortless visit , and of their all missing her very much .
Mr . Elton and I are very good friends , and nothing more ;" and she walked on , amusing herself in the consideration of the blunders which often arise from a partial knowledge of circumstances , of the mistakes which people of high pretensions to judgment are for ever falling into ; and not very well pleased with her brother for imagining her blind and ignorant , and in want of counsel .
The preparing and the going abroad in such weather , with the sacrifice of his children after dinner , were evils , were disagreeables at least , which Mr . John Knightley did not by any means like ; he anticipated nothing in the visit that could be at all worth the purchase ; and the whole of their drive to the vicarage was spent by him in expressing his discontent .
Mr . Weston was a great favourite , and there was not a creature in the world to whom she spoke with such unreserve , as to his wife ; not any one , to whom she related with such conviction of being listened to and understood , of being always interesting and always intelligible , the little affairs , arrangements , perplexities , and pleasures of her father and herself .
For her own sake she could not be rude ; and for Harriet ' s , in the hope that all would yet turn out right , she was even positively civil ; but it was an effort ; especially as something was going on amongst the others , in the most overpowering period of Mr . Elton ' s nonsense , which she particularly wished to listen to .
I am as confident of seeing Frank here before the middle of January , as I am of being here myself : but your good friend there ( nodding towards the upper end of the table ) has so few vagaries herself , and has been so little used to them at Hartfield , that she cannot calculate on their effects , as I have been long in the practice of doing ."
He began with great earnestness to entreat her to refrain from visiting the sick - chamber again , for the present -- to entreat her to _promise_ _him_ not to venture into such hazard till he had seen Mr . Perry and learnt his opinion ; and though she tried to laugh it off and bring the subject back into its proper course , there was no putting an end to his extreme solicitude about her .
She had not time to know how Mr . Elton took the reproof , so rapidly did another subject succeed ; for Mr . John Knightley now came into the room from examining the weather , and opened on them all with the information of the ground being covered with snow , and of its still snowing fast , with a strong drifting wind ; concluding with these words to Mr . Woodhouse :
To Isabella , the relief of such tidings was very great , and they were scarcely less acceptable to Emma on her father ' s account , who was immediately set as much at ease on the subject as his nervous constitution allowed ; but the alarm that had been raised could not be appeased so as to admit of any comfort for him while he continued at Randalls .
The carriage came : and Mr . Woodhouse , always the first object on such occasions , was carefully attended to his own by Mr . Knightley and Mr . Weston ; but not all that either could say could prevent some renewal of alarm at the sight of the snow which had actually fallen , and the discovery of a much darker night than he had been prepared for .
Isabella stept in after her father ; John Knightley , forgetting that he did not belong to their party , stept in after his wife very naturally ; so that Emma found , on being escorted and followed into the second carriage by Mr . Elton , that the door was to be lawfully shut on them , and that they were to have a tete - a - tete drive .
The distressing explanation she had to make to Harriet , and all that poor Harriet would be suffering , with the awkwardness of future meetings , the difficulties of continuing or discontinuing the acquaintance , of subduing feelings , concealing resentment , and avoiding eclat , were enough to occupy her in most unmirthful reflections some time longer , and she went to bed at last with nothing settled but the conviction of her having blundered most dreadfully .
It was weather which might fairly confine every body at home ; and though she hoped and believed him to be really taking comfort in some society or other , it was very pleasant to have her father so well satisfied with his being all alone in his own house , too wise to stir out ; and to hear him say to Mr . Knightley , whom no weather could keep entirely from them ,--
Harriet did think him all perfection , and maintained the non - existence of any body equal to him in person or goodness -- and did , in truth , prove herself more resolutely in love than Emma had foreseen ; but yet it appeared to her so natural , so inevitable to strive against an inclination of that sort _unrequited_ , that she could not comprehend its continuing very long in equal force .
To take a dislike to a young man , only because he appeared to be of a different disposition from himself , was unworthy the real liberality of mind which she was always used to acknowledge in him ; for with all the high opinion of himself , which she had often laid to his charge , she had never before for a moment supposed it could make him unjust to the merit of another .
She could not think that Harriet ' s solace or her own sins required more ; and she was therefore industriously getting rid of the subject as they returned ;-- but it burst out again when she thought she had succeeded , and after speaking some time of what the poor must suffer in winter , and receiving no other answer than a very plaintive -- " Mr . Elton is so good to the poor !"
yes -- Mr . Elton , I understand -- certainly as to dancing -- Mrs . Cole was telling me that dancing at the rooms at Bath was -- Mrs . Cole was so kind as to sit some time with us , talking of Jane ; for as soon as she came in , she began inquiring after her , Jane is so very great a favourite there .
so considerate !-- But however , she is so far from well , that her kind friends the Campbells think she had better come home , and try an air that always agrees with her ; and they have no doubt that three or four months at Highbury will entirely cure her -- and it is certainly a great deal better that she should come here , than go to Ireland , if she is unwell .
It was easy to decide that she was still too young ; and Jane remained with them , sharing , as another daughter , in all the rational pleasures of an elegant society , and a judicious mixture of home and amusement , with only the drawback of the future , the sobering suggestions of her own good understanding to remind her that all this might soon be over .
She had never been quite well since the time of their daughter ' s marriage ; and till she should have completely recovered her usual strength , they must forbid her engaging in duties , which , so far from being compatible with a weakened frame and varying spirits , seemed , under the most favourable circumstances , to require something more than human perfection of body and mind to be discharged with tolerable comfort .
Why she did not like Jane Fairfax might be a difficult question to answer ; Mr . Knightley had once told her it was because she saw in her the really accomplished young woman , which she wanted to be thought herself ; and though the accusation had been eagerly refuted at the time , there were moments of self - examination in which her conscience could not quite acquit her .
Though she did not feel the first intelligence as she might have done the day before , or an hour before , its interest soon increased ; and before their first conversation was over , she had talked herself into all the sensations of curiosity , wonder and regret , pain and pleasure , as to this fortunate Miss Hawkins , which could conduce to place the Martins under proper subordination in her fancy .
As Harriet now lived , the Martins could not get at her , without seeking her , where hitherto they had wanted either the courage or the condescension to seek her ; for since her refusal of the brother , the sisters never had been at Mrs . Goddard ' s ; and a twelvemonth might pass without their being thrown together again , with any necessity , or even any power of speech .
He had caught both substance and shadow -- both fortune and affection , and was just the happy man he ought to be ; talking only of himself and his own concerns -- expecting to be congratulated -- ready to be laughed at -- and , with cordial , fearless smiles , now addressing all the young ladies of the place , to whom , a few weeks ago , he would have been more cautiously gallant .
She was , in fact , beginning very much to wonder that she had ever thought him pleasing at all ; and his sight was so inseparably connected with some very disagreeable feelings , that , except in a moral light , as a penance , a lesson , a source of profitable humiliation to her own mind , she would have been thankful to be assured of never seeing him again .
Part of every winter she had been used to spend in Bath ; but Bristol was her home , the very heart of Bristol ; for though the father and mother had died some years ago , an uncle remained -- in the law line -- nothing more distinctly honourable was hazarded of him , than that he was in the law line ; and with him the daughter had lived .
Harriet had not been at home ; but a note had been prepared and left for her , written in the very style to touch ; a small mixture of reproach , with a great deal of kindness ; and till Mr . Elton himself appeared , she had been much occupied by it , continually pondering over what could be done in return , and wishing to do more than she dared to confess .
They all seemed to remember the day , the hour , the party , the occasion -- to feel the same consciousness , the same regrets -- to be ready to return to the same good understanding ; and they were just growing again like themselves , ( Harriet , as Emma must suspect , as ready as the best of them to be cordial and happy ,) when the carriage reappeared , and all was over .
He was very much pleased with Randalls , thought it a most admirably arranged house , would hardly allow it even to be very small , admired the situation , the walk to Highbury , Highbury itself , Hartfield still more , and professed himself to have always felt the sort of interest in the country which none but one ' s _own_ country gives , and the greatest curiosity to visit it .
" But your father is not going so far ; he is only going to the Crown , quite on the other side of the street , and there are a great many houses ; you might be very much at a loss , and it is a very dirty walk , unless you keep on the footpath ; but my coachman can tell you where you had best cross the street ."
Mr . Frank Churchill still declined it , looking as serious as he could , and his father gave his hearty support by calling out , " My good friend , this is quite unnecessary ; Frank knows a puddle of water when he sees it , and as to Mrs . Bates ' s , he may get there from the Crown in a hop , step , and jump ."
He could not be persuaded that so many good - looking houses as he saw around him , could not furnish numbers enough for such a meeting ; and even when particulars were given and families described , he was still unwilling to admit that the inconvenience of such a mixture would be any thing , or that there would be the smallest difficulty in every body ' s returning into their proper place the next morning .
In general he was judged , throughout the parishes of Donwell and Highbury , with great candour ; liberal allowances were made for the little excesses of such a handsome young man -- one who smiled so often and bowed so well ; but there was one spirit among them not to be softened , from its power of censure , by bows or smiles -- Mr . Knightley .
He did , on the condition of some promises on her side : such as that , if she came home cold , she would be sure to warm herself thoroughly ; if hungry , that she would take something to eat ; that her own maid should sit up for her ; and that Serle and the butler should see that every thing were safe in the house , as usual .
With Tuesday came the agreeable prospect of seeing him again , and for a longer time than hitherto ; of judging of his general manners , and by inference , of the meaning of his manners towards herself ; of guessing how soon it might be necessary for her to throw coldness into her air ; and of fancying what the observations of all those might be , who were now seeing them together for the first time .
" Yes , and what you told me on that head , confirmed an idea which I had entertained before .-- I do not mean to reflect upon the good intentions of either Mr . Dixon or Miss Fairfax , but I cannot help suspecting either that , after making his proposals to her friend , he had the misfortune to fall in love with _her_ , or that he became conscious of a little attachment on her side .
She did not wish to speak of the pianoforte , she felt too much in the secret herself , to think the appearance of curiosity or interest fair , and therefore purposely kept at a distance ; but by the others , the subject was almost immediately introduced , and she saw the blush of consciousness with which congratulations were received , the blush of guilt which accompanied the name of " my excellent friend Colonel Campbell ."
Mrs . Weston , kind - hearted and musical , was particularly interested by the circumstance , and Emma could not help being amused at her perseverance in dwelling on the subject ; and having so much to ask and to say as to tone , touch , and pedal , totally unsuspicious of that wish of saying as little about it as possible , which she plainly read in the fair heroine ' s countenance .
They combated the point some time longer in the same way ; Emma rather gaining ground over the mind of her friend ; for Mrs . Weston was the most used of the two to yield ; till a little bustle in the room shewed them that tea was over , and the instrument in preparation ;-- and at the same moment Mr . Cole approaching to entreat Miss Woodhouse would do them the honour of trying it .
They were stopping , however , in the first place at Mrs . Bates ' s ; whose house was a little nearer Randalls than Ford ' s ; and had all but knocked , when Emma caught their eye .-- Immediately they crossed the road and came forward to her ; and the agreeableness of yesterday ' s engagement seemed to give fresh pleasure to the present meeting .
then , said I , I must run across , I am sure Miss Woodhouse will allow me just to run across and entreat her to come in ; my mother will be so very happy to see her -- and now we are such a nice party , she cannot refuse .--` Aye , pray do ,' said Mr . Frank Churchill , ` Miss Woodhouse ' s opinion of the instrument will be worth having .'
So I begged he would not -- for really as to ours being gone , I could not absolutely say that we had a great many left -- it was but half a dozen indeed ; but they should be all kept for Jane ; and I could not at all bear that he should be sending us more , so liberal as he had been already ; and Jane said the same .
That she was not immediately ready , Emma did suspect to arise from the state of her nerves ; she had not yet possessed the instrument long enough to touch it without emotion ; she must reason herself into the power of performance ; and Emma could not but pity such feelings , whatever their origin , and could not but resolve never to expose them to her neighbour again .
Instances have been known of young people passing many , many months successively , without being at any ball of any description , and no material injury accrue either to body or mind ;-- but when a beginning is made -- when the felicities of rapid motion have once been , though slightly , felt -- it must be a very heavy set that does not ask for more .
A word was put in for a second young Cox ; and at last , Mr . Weston naming one family of cousins who must be included , and another of very old acquaintance who could not be left out , it became a certainty that the five couple would be at least ten , and a very interesting speculation in what possible manner they could be disposed of .
Every door was now closed , the passage plan given up , and the first scheme of dancing only in the room they were in resorted to again ; and with such good - will on Frank Churchill ' s part , that the space which a quarter of an hour before had been deemed barely sufficient for five couple , was now endeavoured to be made out quite enough for ten .
One thing only was wanting to make the prospect of the ball completely satisfactory to Emma -- its being fixed for a day within the granted term of Frank Churchill ' s stay in Surry ; for , in spite of Mr . Weston ' s confidence , she could not think it so very impossible that the Churchills might not allow their nephew to remain a day beyond his fortnight .
" Ah !--( shaking his head )-- the uncertainty of when I may be able to return !-- I shall try for it with a zeal !-- It will be the object of all my thoughts and cares !-- and if my uncle and aunt go to town this spring -- but I am afraid -- they did not stir last spring -- I am afraid it is a custom gone for ever ."
What strength , or what constancy of affection he might be subject to , was another point ; but at present she could not doubt his having a decidedly warm admiration , a conscious preference of herself ; and this persuasion , joined to all the rest , made her think that she _must_ be a little in love with him , in spite of every previous determination against it .
She had great pleasure in hearing Frank Churchill talked of ; and , for his sake , greater pleasure than ever in seeing Mr . and Mrs . Weston ; she was very often thinking of him , and quite impatient for a letter , that she might know how he was , how were his spirits , how was his aunt , and what was the chance of his coming to Randalls again this spring .
_Miss_ _Woodhouse_ appeared more than once , and never without a something of pleasing connexion , either a compliment to her taste , or a remembrance of what she had said ; and in the very last time of its meeting her eye , unadorned as it was by any such broad wreath of gallantry , she yet could discern the effect of her influence and acknowledge the greatest compliment perhaps of all conveyed .
The idea of her being indebted to Mrs . Elton for what was called an _introduction_ -- of her going into public under the auspices of a friend of Mrs . Elton ' s -- probably some vulgar , dashing widow , who , with the help of a boarder , just made a shift to live !-- The dignity of Miss Woodhouse , of Hartfield , was sunk indeed !
Emma hoped it must rapidly work Harriet ' s cure ; but the sensations which could prompt such behaviour sunk them both very much .-- It was not to be doubted that poor Harriet ' s attachment had been an offering to conjugal unreserve , and her own share in the story , under a colouring the least favourable to her and the most soothing to him , had in all likelihood been given also .
I am sure they will like her extremely ; and when she gets a little acquainted with them , her fears will completely wear off , for there really is nothing in the manners of either but what is highly conciliating .-- I shall have her very often indeed while they are with me , and I dare say we shall sometimes find a seat for her in the barouche - landau in some of our exploring parties ."
The change on Mrs . Elton ' s side soon afterwards appeared , and she was left in peace -- neither forced to be the very particular friend of Mrs . Elton , nor , under Mrs . Elton ' s guidance , the very active patroness of Jane Fairfax , and only sharing with others in a general way , in knowing what was felt , what was meditated , what was done .
In the course of the spring she must return their civilities by one very superior party -- in which her card - tables should be set out with their separate candles and unbroken packs in the true style -- and more waiters engaged for the evening than their own establishment could furnish , to carry round the refreshments at exactly the proper hour , and in the proper order .
Besides the Eltons , it must be the Westons and Mr . Knightley ; so far it was all of course -- and it was hardly less inevitable that poor little Harriet must be asked to make the eighth :-- but this invitation was not given with equal satisfaction , and on many accounts Emma was particularly pleased by Harriet ' s begging to be allowed to decline it .
She was delighted with the fortitude of her little friend -- for fortitude she knew it was in her to give up being in company and stay at home ; and she could now invite the very person whom she really wanted to make the eighth , Jane Fairfax .-- Since her last conversation with Mrs . Weston and Mr . Knightley , she was more conscience - stricken about Jane Fairfax than she had often been .-- Mr .
The two eldest little Knightleys were engaged to pay their grandpapa and aunt a visit of some weeks in the spring , and their papa now proposed bringing them , and staying one whole day at Hartfield -- which one day would be the very day of this party .-- His professional engagements did not allow of his being put off , but both father and daughter were disturbed by its happening so .
" I never saw any gentleman ' s handwriting "-- Emma began , looking also at Mrs . Weston ; but stopped , on perceiving that Mrs . Weston was attending to some one else -- and the pause gave her time to reflect , " Now , how am I going to introduce him ?-- Am I unequal to speaking his name at once before all these people ?
They were the first entitled , after Mrs . Weston and Emma , to be made happy ;-- from them he would have proceeded to Miss Fairfax , but she was so deep in conversation with John Knightley , that it would have been too positive an interruption ; and finding himself close to Mrs . Elton , and her attention disengaged , he necessarily began on the subject with her .
Elton .-- This letter tells us -- it is a short letter -- written in a hurry , merely to give us notice -- it tells us that they are all coming up to town directly , on Mrs . Churchill ' s account -- she has not been well the whole winter , and thinks Enscombe too cold for her -- so they are all to move southward without loss of time ."
It is just what I used to say to a certain gentleman in company in the days of courtship , when , because things did not go quite right , did not proceed with all the rapidity which suited his feelings , he was apt to be in despair , and exclaim that he was sure at this rate it would be _May_ before Hymen ' s saffron robe would be put on for us .
Now , however , it was absolutely to be ; every preparation was resumed , and very soon after the Churchills had removed to Richmond , a few lines from Frank , to say that his aunt felt already much better for the change , and that he had no doubt of being able to join them for twenty - four hours at any given time , induced them to name as early a day as possible .
Mrs . Elton then said , " Nobody can think less of dress in general than I do -- but upon such an occasion as this , when every body ' s eyes are so much upon me , and in compliment to the Westons -- who I have no doubt are giving this ball chiefly to do me honour -- I would not wish to be inferior to others .
There was one , however , which Emma thought something of .-- The two last dances before supper were begun , and Harriet had no partner ;-- the only young lady sitting down ;-- and so equal had been hitherto the number of dancers , that how there could be any one disengaged was the wonder !-- But Emma ' s wonder lessened soon afterwards , on seeing Mr . Elton sauntering about .
It was one of the agreeable recollections of the ball , which she walked about the lawn the next morning to enjoy .-- She was extremely glad that they had come to so good an understanding respecting the Eltons , and that their opinions of both husband and wife were so much alike ; and his praise of Harriet , his concession in her favour , was peculiarly gratifying .
The impertinence of the Eltons , which for a few minutes had threatened to ruin the rest of her evening , had been the occasion of some of its highest satisfactions ; and she looked forward to another happy result -- the cure of Harriet ' s infatuation .-- From Harriet ' s manner of speaking of the circumstance before they quitted the ballroom , she had strong hopes .

